The operations of RAF Bomber Command were still subject to a number of variables, including the weather. The Pathfinder target marking force was just getting established and was developing its techniques. When the weather and moon conditions were right, the target was marked correctly and the bomber stream was concentrated on the target in a short period of intense bombing the results could be devastating. All of these factors came together for the raid on the 10/11th September, causing more destruction than had ever been achieved before, apart from one of the experimental 1000 bomber raids. Bomber Command was beginning to have the impact that was hoped for:From the Air Situation Report for the week as reported to the British War Cabinet, see TNA CAB 66/28/48The later post raid assessment was also seen by the War Cabinet:NB: the numbers of aircraft involved vary between different official accounts.At Dusseldorf, 360 aircraft dropped 700 tons of bombs. Though a large part of the attacking force concentrated its effort on the main objective, starting a number of extensive fires (see Appendix VII [below]). scattered fires were also seen west of the target, and some bombs fell at Krefeld, Munchen-Gladbach and adjacent towns. Thirty bombers are missing, five crashed and three came down in the sea.…DusseldorfAssessment of damage from photographs taken the day after the attack on the 10th/11th is rendered difficult as parts of the town are wholly obscured by the smoke of fires still burning. It is at present only possible to give some idea of the extensive damage that has actually been caused. In the centre of the town there are six noteworthy areas of damage, the three largest of which are 3/4 mile long, varying in-width from 90 yards to 1/4 mile, 1/2 long by about 180 yards wide, and nearly 1/4 mile long and 250 yards wide. The damage to residential and industrial property on both banks of the Rhine is severe, and
evacuation will be hindered by a direct hit on the main station, which appears to have been heavily damaged.Dusseldorf (10th/11th September).It is now apparent that, measured by the extent of destruction to industries and communications, this attack was the most profitable of all our bombing raids, with the exception of that on Cologne on 30th/31st May. Large areas were devastated in both Rostock and Lubeck but this did not result in more
than a fraction of the industrial damage done in Dusseldorf.In Dusseldorfs 380 acres of complete devastation no less than 30 factories and important works were either completely destroyed or so damaged that output must be seriously curtailed. Among them were six factories making steel products or machinery, two factories making steel tubes, one making machine tools and magnetic mines, two chemical works and many other factories producing a variety of commodities such as enamel, paper, boilers, wire, insulating materials, railway wagons and harvesting machinery. This formidable list of destroyed or seriously damaged factories is additional to the 24 factories damaged in the raid of the last night of August.…The estimate of 380 acres of complete devastation mentioned above does not include innumerable isolated incidents of bomb and blast damage throughout the city and its suburbs.
 10th september 1942 bomber command target dusseldorf