The dawn twilight bombing that was supposed to neutralise the defences on Omaha beach had entirely missed the Wehrmacht strongpoints. Very few of the German defenders on Omaha beach had been caught by the subsequent Naval gun barrage, they had well built trenches and shelters in which to take cover. When the mass of assault troops landed on the sand directly in front of them they were soon outnumbered. But they were in sheltered positions, partially concealed and the American troops were in the open. All they had to do was clean the sand from their weapons and open fire. It was not simply a matter of duty and following orders, it was also a matter of personal survival.This is the account of eighteen year old Gefreiter Franz Gockel, 3rd Company, 726 Regiment, 716 Division, Wehrmacht. He was stationed in a machine gun post at Widerstandsnest [WN] 62. In a letter written to his parents on the 10th June  he describes the morning of the 6th June, after he had climbed out of the rubble of his dugout at the end of the Naval bombardment:This account appears in D-Day: By Those Who Were There.For a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.Then the slaughter began. The water was about 250 metres away. Many landing craft were destroyed by heavy fire, but many more kept coming. Now for the Americans it was all about getting over 250 metres of sand and that was disastrous for them. It was also a miracle that with all the shooting not one of our section was either killed or wounded. By now the Americans were starting to get a taste of us. Although we were shot at from the landing craft, our twin and four-barrelled guns continued unrelenting fire. Soon the beach was covered in Americans caught by our firepower.Only a few reached the safety of the gravel bank. Many also remained uninjured lying on the sands. But as the water came in, they too had to move on. In turn we opened fire on them.Beyond the gravel bank was the fire curtain for our grenade launchers. These created heavy losses amongst the Americans. We couldn’t understand how they, despite such heavy losses under such a hail of fire, could still come on. Around midday they had broken through on our left.… It’s estimated our unit has accounted for between 2,000—2500 dead and wounded as well as fifteen to twenty tanks destroyed. In addition about twenty small to medium landing craft and a large tank landing craft have been destroyed. We seem to have offset the massive superiority in numbers.I fired over 400 shots with my rifle, getting about 300 hits and at a distance of about 100-250 metres. 1115 the slaughter on omaha beach continues