Events in France were now unfolding very rapidly. The German ‘Blitzkrieg’ was making dramatic progress, unnerving the French government and many in the senior military command. Winston Churchill would make six visits to France during the following weeks, attempting to find a way to help the French keep fighting. There was a danger that those at home would be equally unnerved by the seemingly invincible Wehrmacht.Churchill, on his third day as Prime Minister, addressed the House of Commons for the first time as war leader:Meanwhile in Belgium some of the British Army had reached their allotted positions and were preparing their defences:Newsreel released on 13th May 1940 showing Belgium and Dutch preparations for invasion:To form an Administration of this scale and complexity is a serious undertaking in itself, but it must be remembered that we are in the preliminary stage of one of the greatest battles in history, that we are in action at many points in Norway and in Holland, that we have to be prepared in the Mediterranean, that the air battle is continuous and that many preparations, … have to be made here at home. In this crisis I hope I may be pardoned if I do not address the House at any length today. I hope at any of my friends and colleagues, or former colleagues, who are affected by the political reconstruction, all make allowance, all allowance, for any lack of ceremony with which it has been necessary to act. I would say the House, as I said to those who have joined this Government: “I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat.”We have before us an ordeal of the most grievous kind. We have before us many, many long months of struggle and of suffering. You ask, what is our policy? I will say: is to wage war, by sea, land, and air, with all our might and with all the strength that God can give us: to wage war against a monstrous tyranny, never surpassed in the dark, lamentable catalogue of human crime. That is our policy. You ask, what is our aim? I can answer in one word: It is victory, victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be; for without victory, there is no survival. Let that be realized; no survival for the British Empire; no survival for all that the British Empire has stood for, no survival for the urge and impulse of the ages, that mankind will move forward towards its goal. But I take up my task with buoyancy and hope. I feel sure that our cause will not be suffered to fail among men. At this time I feel entitled to claim the aid of all, and I say, “Come then, let us go forward together with our united strength.”
From the Diary of Captain R. Leah, 1st Battalion, Queen’s Own Cameron Highlanders :Monday 13th May.We spent today digging and made very good progress all round. The position was a good one on the forward slopes of a ridge over the River Lasne.  The ground on this side of the river was not so good, being thickly wooded and obscuring the obstacle.  12 Pl [Platoon] were on right, P.S.M. Fleming, Peter 10 Pl. , and P.S.M. Kerr 11 Pl on left. A certain amount of enemy bombing and machine-gunning.  Enemy bombing of Ottenburg which we could see from our position.  Great difficulty in getting some of the Belgians to evacuate: this was finally done.  Spent another night in the woods without any discomfort. Coy. nil marching.  Self 4 miles.[Entry No.4, for the first entry see 10th May 1940.See TNA WO 217/15
 13th may 1940i have nothing to offer but blood toil tears and sweat