Belfast was poorly prepared for the blitz compared with other British cities, few children had been evacuated, air raid shelters were sparse and defensive arrangements weak. Yet the the Harland and Wolf ship building yards and Northern Ireland’s strategic role in the battle of the Atlantic made it a likely target. When German bombers struck on the night of the 15th/16th April the effects were disproportionate. Over 900 people died. Over 50,000 homes were damaged leaving almost a quarter of the population homeless. Fire crews came from south of the border, from the neutral state of Ireland, and stayed for up to three days to help fight the fires.Moya Woodside kept a diary for Mass Observation and recored the scenes in Belfast the day after the bombing, when thousands were homeless and many more wanted to find a way out of the city:See Public Record Office of Northern Ireland T/3808/1.  Second World War Northern Ireland has many more images and original records.Passed railway station after lunch on my way  to refugee committee, I have never seen anything like  it. Thousands of people crowding in, cars,  buses,  carts and  lorries,  bathchairs, women pushing prams and go- karts with anything up  to 6 or 8 children  trailing along, belongings in blankets,  pillowcases, baskets and boxes.Coming back from the committee at 4.00 pm, found that  the station doors had been shut.    Crowds were waiting outside, mothers and children sitting on the pavement allround,  constant stream of people arriving on  foot and on buses,   many looking exhausting. It was a heartbreaking sight. Went up   to see some  friends,   living on road which  leads out of town Such an exodus,   on  foot,  in  trams,   lorries, trailers, cattle  floats, bicycles,   delivery vans,  anything that would move would be utilised. Private cars streamed past  laden with women and children,   with matresses tied on top and all sorts of paraphenialia roped on behind. Hundreds were waiting at the main bus-stops. Anxiety on every  face.Came home to find a message awaiting me from one of our refugees asking . could  I help to find somebody  in  the country for his wife and child. As he lived in a reported Blitz area,  it sounded urgent,   after supper I got on my bike again and resolved to try and get through to  them. (They  live across  town about 4 miles away.) Found that  the  road had only just been opened and was being policed by military.What awful  scences meet me as  I proceded. It  looked like photographs of Spain or China or some town in the last war. Houses  roofless,  windowless,   burnt out or burning, familiar landmarks gone and  in  their place vast craters and mounds of rubble. The desolation is  indescribable. Thousands  and thousands must be homeless, and as  for the death toll, I shuddered to think horrors and ghastly injuries and death which have occured. 16th april 1941 aftermath of the belfast blitz