The US Commanders were now realising that they faced something much bigger than they had at first thought. German forces were pushing a ‘bulge’ into their lines on the Belgium -German border. This was the term the Press would pick up on.For those facing the onslaught it was a disorientating experience at best. Company Commander Charles B. MacDonald of Company I, 3rd Battalion, 23rd Infantry Regiment had seen his company fall back in the face of the enemy. They were outflanked and almost overrun by Panzers. He had been forced to crawl through wet snow to make his escape with a few other men.MacDonald felt he was a failure for the retreat and was ready to resign his commission. Instead when he finally found his Regimental commander he was congratulated for holding out much longer than anyone expected. He was almost too tired to appreciate it.He was told to wait for new re-inforcement who would come up and help him hold the new position:It seemed liked another retreat – but in the greater scheme of things the 23rd Regiment was making a successful stand. Each of the battalions was fighting savage battles to hold the line.Charles B. Macdonald: Company Commander: The Classic Infantry Memoir of World War IIFor four days the US 2nd (which the 23rd Regiment belonged to) and 9th Divisions fought to hold out against the 12th SS Panzer Division commanded by Sepp Dietrich. The Germans were already behind schedule but they couldn’t break through at Krinkelt-Rocherath, in front of the Elsenborn Ridge, to the key road network on the northern sector of the Bulge. They would break off and turn their attention to another town – Bastogne.General Courtney Hodges, Commanding General of the 1st Army, declared, We found a pile of fresh hay in the end of the barn facing the enemy. I dug out an armful and spread it in a rear corner of the barn. I was cold. My clothes were soaked and my feet were drenched, but I pulled a portion of the hay over me and drifted off into a sleep of utter exhaustion.It was neither the sound of the tanks firing nor the artillery exploding nor the staccato chant of automatic weapons that woke me. I seemed to hear them somewhere in the background, but my fatigued body did not respond. Someone was shaking me.“Wake up, Cap’n! Wake up! The sonofabitches have hit us again. They’re all over the goddamned place!”I jumped to my feet. The sound of battle in my ears was real now, and I could see the flash of tracer bullets as they passed the open door.“Where’s L Company?” I asked.“They didn’t get here,” the soldier answered, and I could not make out who he was in the darkness. “The others are gone. We’d better get the hell out.”With that he was gone from the barn. I did not think to pick up my carbine. I looked toward the forward end of the barn where the hay had been stored. A tank was firing point-blank into the barn. The dry hay was a mass of flame.I ran from the barn. The surrounding area was lit up from the flames and the paths of thousands of fiery tracer bullets. I saw a soldier, silhouetted against the tracers, throw a can of gasoline at a tank. The tank burst into flame.There seemed to be no lull coming in the firing. I ran toward the rear of the farmhouse, snagging my trousers on a fence post and tearing at them madly. I flattened myself against the back wall of the stone building just as I shell from an enemy tank crashed into the front. The house rocked pecariously, trembling from the impact of the explosion.The snow-covered area to the rear of the house became the beaten zone for countless tracer bullets. Tank fire crashed around the building. Artillery fell without pattern in the snow. The night was ablaze with more noise and flame than I had thought possible for men to create. Here was a ‘movie war’. Here was Armageddon.I could see the outlines of a bomb crater halfway between the house and the first hedgerow behind it. I waited for a lull in the firing before leaving lhe momentary safety of the back of the house. I ran as fast as I could run across the open field and dived headfirst into the bomb crater. My body hit two other men huddling in the hole.What the 2nd Division has done in the last four days will live forever in the history of the United States Army. 18 december 1944 us 23rd regiment holds the line against 12th ss