The Allies had been struggling all year at Cassino, the mountainous redoubt in the middle of the German ‘Gustav’ Line. Bitter fighting had continued in appalling conditions and the Monastery at the centre of the defences had been smashed to smithereens. The attempt to turn the line by landing at Anzio had merely seen the Allies bogged down in another location as well.The latest attempt to break through had begun on the 11th, when the end came it was a surprise to many involved.Major Hardy Parker was with the 2nd Battalion Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, they had been involved in the battle over the course of the last week. He spent the night of the 17th close to the front line, watching a massive German bombing raid which narrowly missed his area. They went forward again today – but suddenly the opposition had crumbled:See Hardy Parkhurst: Diary of a SoldierLancs Fusiliers has a tribute to the Polish troops, and a version of the Polish song, Red poppies on Monte Cassino:18.5.44It is a great and memorable day. Cassino has fallen and the Gustav Line has been completely broken.We were not able to close the gap entirely by joining hands with the Poles on Route 6, and so a lot of the Parachutists were able to get away. Hence the fury with which they fought against both Poles and 4 Division. By keeping the jaws apart they were able to thin out to a large extent. Nevertheless, they have suffered terriﬁc casualties.But the day is ours and a great victory has been won. Last night we received an operation order for the attack on Cassino in which we were to take part. It was to be supported by two squadrons of N.Z. tanks.But when the infantry probed the outskirts they found little opposition, and many Germans gave themselves up. There was some sniping and some machine gunning, but this was soon overcome, and in due course the place was mopped up. Some casualties were caused by time bombs left by the Hun.Later we learnt that the Polish ﬂag was ﬂying over the Monastery. It was very ﬁtting that this should be so, for the Poles have suffered dearly. Georgi, the Polish liaison ofﬁcer, told me that the hills behind the Monastery were absolutely indescribable. Hundreds of dead lay all over the hillsides, Americans, French, N. Zealanders, and now Poles.The Germans were dug in in steel emplacements and they would not give up. I went down into Cassino at about 1100 and they were still mopping up. It was a phantom town, stark and horrible, the epitomy of war. I went straight down Route 6 with its green ﬁelds and lovely trees on either side.On approaching the Rapido bridge, the green stopped. All the trees were naked, stark and leaﬂess. The bridges we had managed to get up were almost totally wrecked. Route 6 dwindled into a ‘sheep track’ which wound its way through shell craters, bomb craters, and the gaunt remains of houses.All the way up this track was a mass of kit, blankets, bits of clothing, boots, steel helmets. The whole of the area in front of the town was a ghastly marsh, caused by the lack of drainage and the bombs and shells which had blown everything to pieces.All the craters have ﬁlled with water, which stank horribly and were very often a watery grave. Down this grim avenue were many bodies, which had been untouched for weeks, a grim spectacle.The town itself was a shattered wilderness of rubble. I cannot describe the destruction. I looked up at the Monastery, a mass of jutting rubble. Every single tree on the shell-shattered mountain face below the Monastery was stark and naked.The warmongers should see the place, they should leave it as it is as a waming to all future Dictators, to all future generations. I saw some German prisoners coming back; they looked like ghosts. The town has been heavily mined and booby-trapped, so a complete inspection was not advisable. The stench was horrible and I cannot imagine anyone coming back to live there.It is hard to imagine a few months ago, this was a beautiful town. It has made an indelible mark on my memory.Tonight all is quiet and the battle is over.Red poppies on Monte Cassino
Instead of dew, drank Polish blood.
As the soldier crushed them in falling,
For the anger was more potent than death.
Years will pass and ages will roll,
But traces of bygone days will stay,
And the poppies on Monte Cassino
Will be redder having quaffed Polish blood. 18 may 1944 polish troops capture monte cassino