The war in Mediterranean sea around Crete was suddenly hotting up, with the Luftwaffe making constant attacks on British shipping: From the original recommendation for an award, submitted by Captain Carne see TNA ADM 1/11502On 18th May while on patrol in company with Rear Admiral (D) in “Phoebe”, an S.O.S. was received from Hospital Ship “Aba” who reported being bombed in a position South East of Crete. “Coventry” in company with “Phoebe” proceeded to her assistance arriving at about 1745. Shortly after the “Aba” was sighted, a large group of Ju.87s approached the ships. These aircraft attacked “Aba” “Phoebe” and “Coventry” independently. “Coventry” engaged several targets in turn, both directors operating independently. Petty Officer Sephton was in ‘B’ director as layer. The first direct attack on “Coventry” came from astern when a Ju.87 carried out a steep dive bombing attack, spraying the ship with machine fire. One bomb was dropped which fell close on the Port quarter, but no damage to the ship was done. As a result of the machine gunning however, Petty Officer Sephton was fatally wounded by a bullet which penetrated the director, passed though his body, and wounded A.B. Fisher who was communication number in the director. Sephton reported to the Control Officer that he had been hit but could carry on. He continued to carry out his duties admirably, although obviously in great pain. Sephton knew that owing to the cramped space in the director and the difficulty of access he could not be relieved until the end of the action. His heroism in carrying on under these conditions set a magnificent example to A.B. Fisher who was also able to carry on, thus maintaining the efficiency of the director.After about ten minutes at the end of the attack, Sephton was relieved. He refused any assistance, climbed out of the director, but collapsed on the deck below. He died next day as a result of the extensive internal injuries sustained during the action.It is considered that Petty Officer Sephton’s heroism in carrying on, and his fine example to Fisher may well have saved “Coventry” and “Aba” who were both attacked after Sephton had been wounded, the attacking aircraft being effectively repelled by “Coventry’s” gunfire. 18th may 1941 petty officer sephton wins the victoria cross