On Guadalcanal [permalink id=24062 text=”the Marines continued”] to hold out in the defence of the base at Henderson Field. The Japanese strategy was to throw men into the fight to seek to overwhelm the Marines positions, resulting in wholesale carnage. The Marines clung on but not without sustaining many casualties, it took extraordinary tenacity to hold up against the onslaught. One man was to distinguish himself on 1st November, although it was to take a long time before he was recognised for what he did:Anthony Casamento’s actions were not officially recognised until 1980, which must be unique amongst Medal of Honor recipients. The process of making the award only began in 1964 when two eyewitnesses to his actions were found.CORPORAL ANTHONY CASAMENTO
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPSFor conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty while serving with Company “D”, First Battalion, Fifth Marines, First Marine Division on Guadalcanal, British Solomon Islands, in action against the enemy Japanese forces on November 1, 1942. Serving as a leader of a machine gun section, Corporal Casamento directed his unit to advance along a ridge near the Matanikau River where they engaged the enemy. He positioned his section to provide covering fire for two flanking units and to provide direct support for the main force of his company which was behind him. During the course of this engagement, all members of his section were either killed or severely wounded and he himself suffered multiple, grievous wounds. Nonetheless, Corporal Casamento continued to provide critical supporting fire for the attack and in defense of his position. Following the loss of all effective personnel, he set up, loaded, and manned his unit’s machine gun, tenaciously holding the enemy forces at bay. Corporal Casamento single-handedly engaged and destroyed one machine gun emplacement to his front and took under fire the other emplacement on the flank. Despite the heat and ferocity of the engagement, he continued to man his own weapon and repeatedly repulsed multiple assaults by the enemy forces, thereby protecting the flanks of the adjoining companies and holding his position until the arrival of his main attacking force. Corporal Casamento’s courageous fighting spirit, heroic conduct, and unwavering dedication to duty reflected great credit upon himself and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the Marine Corps and the United States Naval Service. 1st november 1942 bloody fight for guadalcanal continues