The conditions within the “Falaise Gap” were becoming ever more murderous for the German troops seeking to escape. Amongst those now in headlong retreat were paratroopers who had spent the previous day and night scrambing through hedges and brambles, twice up to their necks while crossing small rivers. Nevertheless they maintained considerable discipline and cohesiveness as a unit, enabling them to engage in a counterattacks to enable them to break through. It would appear that these were the troops assaulting the Polish Armoured Division. They would suffer devastating casualties during these days, but some got through and lived to tell their story.A 2019 study, Hitler’s Paratroopers in Normandy: The German II Parachute Corps in the Battle for France, 1944 quotes extensively from Eugen Meindl, Generalmajor der Fallschirmjägertruppen:Meindl’s distain for panic-mongers in uniform was balanced by his new-found admiration of the Seventh Army commander:With tank support from the 2nd SS-Panzer Division, the Germans succeeded in taking the heights east of Coudehard at about 1630 hours. Thirty minutes later, German motor columns were rolling east ‘Unfortunately, a lot of them were chased by enemy planes and shot up in ames,’ wrote Meindl. ‘I was only able to keep a narrow gap free with the few men I had assisting me, a gap of about 2 or 3 kilometers wide. By taking some prisoners we confirmed the presence of a Polish armoured division.At 1900 hours the II Parachute Corps was able to evacuate the seriously wounded out of the pocket, including General Schimpf, with the aid of a hastily thrown together Red Cross column bearing large white flags with a red cross sewn on them. ‘Not a shot was fired at them,’ remembered Meindl, ‘and I recognised, with thankfulness in my heart, the chivalrous attitude of the enemy, after the hail of fire which had been descending on our heads a little while before. After the ugly scenes I had witnessed that day, the nobility of our enemies made me forget for a moment the nastiness of it all and I offered thanks in my heart in the name of the wounded.The Germans did everything they could to escape the Falaise pocket. Allied pilots reported a large proportion of Wehrmacht vehicles, even tanks, carrying Red Cross flags and emblems.  20 august1944 german paratroopers contempt for fellow troops