The British forces in Greece were falling back, the Germans having achieved decisive [permalink id=11092 text=”air superiority early in the campaign”]. Captain Oliphant describes the retreat:Captain K.M. Oliphant was with the 2/3 Field Regiment of the Royal Artillery, TNA WO 217/33.The official description was rather more prosaic:From the Military Situation Report for the week.Moving back under cover of darkness – little sleep – over shocking roads and precipitious mountain passess covered with snow – vehicle  and guns  topple  over  the   cliffs at  night – it   is  too  dark  to  see  the  road  – the  enemy  shell  the  road with their longe range guns by day and by night, maklng it very difficult  for our vehicles to get  through – but  we get through – a few guns and vehicles are lost but we are still a fighting unit.It becomes a veritable nightmare, no sleep for 7 nights, frayed tempers, but the amazing endurance and  spirits  of  the.  troops  carry  us  through.   At   long last  we  get   2 days  rest  and  then  into  action  again to continue the rearguard role.The countryside  is lovely, waving green crops  and  red poppies,   scarred  at  every few yards by terrific bomb holes. It  seemed that the  whole might  of the German Air Force was turned loose on us.   The Anzacs did a wonderful job  in  racing up  three  hundred miles into  the Greek mountains  to  get  first contact  with  the  Hun and  shelling him  to blazes  to  delay his  advance –  he   suffered  great casualties – but his numbers were overwhelming – we could not stay the tide of his advance  because it was always the flanks falling back which necessitated our withdrawal. It was evident that the German object was to gain the plain of Thessaly and so drive a wedge between the British and Greek forces, and cut the latter off from any possible line of withdrawal.By the evening of the 19th April, German armoured forces operating on both sides of Mount Olympus had gained the eastern half of the plain of Thessaly and had advanced southwards beyond Larissa. At the same time German armoured forces had reached Trikkala, at the extreme north-western end of the plain, whilst the rest of the German line remained unchanged.The most decisive German effort seems to have been made on the 20th April. Those forces which had already on the day before reached the plain of Thessaly advanced on Lamia, whilst German motorised forces struck across the Pindus Mountains from Grevena and reached the Yannina area. At the same time, the roads of withdrawal of the Imperial and Greek forces were attacked by dive-bombers with fighter escort, whilst similar attacks were made on the harbour of Piraeus.
 20th april 1941 german break through in greece