All too often the fate of a lost submarine was never fully discovered. Once on patrol they operated with minimal communication with other ships or their shore base. The only sign that anything was amiss was when a boat failed to return to port on the expected day. So it was with HMS Turbulent, which failed to return on 23 March 1943. She had been, under the command of Commander John Linton, one of the most successful Royal Navy submarines of the whole war. Commander Linton, and by reflection the crew of HMS Turbulent, were recognised with the award of a posthumous Victoria Cross:The ultimate fate of HMS Turbulent may never be firmly established. The suggestion that she was depth charged on the 12th March are discounted by some authorities because there is no wreck in the vicinity of the attack. It may be more likely that she hit a mine.The King has been graciously pleased to approve of the grant of the Victoria Cross for great valour in command of HM Submarines to Commander John Wallace Linton, DSO, DSC, Royal Navy. From the outbreak of war until HMS Turbulent’s last patrol, Commander Linton was constantly in command of submarines, and during that time inflicted great damage on the enemy. He sank one cruiser, one destroyer, one U-boat, twenty-eight supply ships, some 100,000 tons in all, and destroyed three trains by gunfire. In his last year he spent two hundred and fifty-four days at sea, submerged for nearly half the time, and his ship was hunted thirteen times and had two hundred and fifty depth-charges aimed at her. His many and brilliant successes were due to his constant activity and skill, and the daring which never failed him when there was an enemy to be attacked. On one occasion, for instance, in HMS Turbulent, he sighted a convoy of two merchantmen and two destroyers in mist and moonlight. He worked round ahead of the convoy and dived to attack it as it passed through the moon’s rays. On bringing his sights to bear he found himself right ahead of a destroyer. Yet he held his course ’till the destroyer was almost on top of him, and, when his sights came on the convoy, he fired. His great courage and determination were rewarded. He sank one merchantman and one destroyer outright, and set the other Merchantmen on fire so that she blew up..POSTSCRIPT 2017Good evening.  My name is David Tall and I was privileged to command the Nuclear Submarine TURBULENT, named after her gallant forebear lost in 1943.You may find the following information useful in your research.   If anybody wants to access information relating to a relative who served in submarines then it is best for you to contact the National Museum of the Royal Navy archive team directly using the e mail: Library@nmrn.org.uk Full Service Records for naval personnel from the WWII era can be obtained from Navy Records at Derby. Request an application form via e mail navysearchpgrc@tnt.co.uk or telephone 01283 227912. They may ask for proof of identity and relationship and they will make a charge of £30 for this service. I hope this helps.I honour and salute those TURBULENTs who made the ultimate sacrifice on our behalf.Good luck in your searches.David Tall OBECaptain Royal Navy 23rd march 1943 hms turbulent fails to return