The Great Escape from Stalag Luft III was now underway. The original plan had been for 200 men to get out through ‘Harry’, causing a huge embarrassment to the Nazi authorities. In the event eighty three men made it into the tunnel – but four were caught at the entrance and three at the exit when the Germans discovered the operation.That left seventy six men on the run, all attempting to cross occupied Europe. Numbers 43 and 44 through the tunnel had been Norwegian pilots Jens Muller and Per (Peter) Bergsland. They caught a local train from Sagan at 2.04am and by the morning were in Kustrin, en route to the port of Stettin. At the time their journey was through Nazi Greater Germany, in an area now located in Poland.As Norwegians Bergsland and Muller could authentically pose as being electricians en route to work in the area. Even so it was a nerve racking business attempting to travel with false papers:Bergsland and Muller were two of only three men to make successful ‘home runs’ during the Great Escape. Muller’s story The Great Escape from Stalag Luft III: The Memoir of Jens Müller, also covering his time with RAF 331 (Norwegian) Squadron, was a best seller in Norway after the war. It became available in English in 2019.It was nine o’clock. If everything in the camp had run according to schedule the tunnel would not yet have been discovered, and we would be safe for about another hour. But at the morning roll call at ten o’clock the escape would be discovered, the alarm would go and then we could meet with diiculties at any moment. We would then be on our train to Stettin.We were hungry and went into the waiting room after first checking and finding that departure would be in about an hour’s time. So at ten o’clock we would still be in the station at Kustrin and not on the train. We looked for seats in the waiting room.The room was crowded but we found an empty table which some German soldiers had just left. We sat down, took out our sandwiches, ordered some beer and started to enjoy our breakfast. Pete made a sign to me to turn round and look towards the door. I did so.Two friends from the camp entered the room. They looked about, and as there were some other empty seats at our table, came up to us and sat down. We pretended not to know them. They ordered beer, but soon got up and left the table. They smiled slightly as they left and so did we — Good luck!The time passed slowly. The room was crowded with all sorts of people, soldiers and civilians. We had finished eating and sat watching the people and chatting, when Pete stopped suddenly in the middle of a sentence. He looked towards the exit, turned his head calmly my way and said, ‘Don’t turn round. An inspector is coming towards us.’He stubbed out his cigarette. I heard footsteps behind me, boots. They stopped. Pete looked up, past me. I heard a commanding German voice: ‘Papers, please.’I turned round and saw a young German with a sharp face and hard eyes. Pete took out his pocket book. I did the same. I tried to keep my hand from trembling as I handed him my papers. He looked at me.‘Soldiers?’ he asked. ‘No,’we answered. ‘Norwegian workmen.’ He looked at us again and we at him. Then he read our papers. Stood without saying a word. Only read on. He looked efficient. Was the tunnel discovered? Pete and I exchanged glances.Then again we heard the German. ‘Good.’ He handed us our papers, saluted and left. We breathed more easily. But the air in the waiting room felt stiing. It was better out on the platform. As we got up to walk across the room, we saw the German right in front of us. He stared at me and looked at me inquiringly while we walked up to him and past him.The two comrades we had met in the waiting room were to take another train. They were probably going to Danzig. Later on we heard that two had boarded a freight ship as stowaways. Out at sea they had given themselves up to the captain. This fellow had turned the ship round, gone back to Danzig and given the fugitives up to the German authorities. They were shot.I asked Pete to wait on the platform while I Went to the toilet. When I came out again he had disappeared. I waited a while. Then I thought perhaps he had gone over to the platform from where the train would leave, and I went there. But no Pete to be seen. I would not walk back again as he could very well have been arrested.Perhaps they were also looking for me. The train had come in and would be leaving in a few minutes. Then I caught sight of Pete. I saw him coming out of a dark corner just as the train was about to start. He said he had hidden there out of the way of the German inspector.We boarded the train. It was almost empty. For quite some time we had the compartment to ourselves. Even with the worst part of our journey still before us we were glad to leave Kustrin.The train jogged along. We were quite sure the escape had been discovered, but the chances of an inspection on this train were small. The only check would be when our tickets were taken at the exit from the station. 25 march 1944 on the run in nazi germany