Vera Inber had survived the first cruel months of the Leningrad siege. In the depths of winter the [permalink id=15565 text=”death toll from cold and starvation”] had mounted alarmingly. The ordeal was far from over but some relief came with the opening of a road over the the frozen expanse of Lake Ladoga.
As a journalist, on 26th February, she had the chance to leave the city to visit a army base nearby:See Vera Inber: Leningrad Diary   Lake Ladoga is an enormous plain of ice and snow-as on the Pole. Everything is made of snow-fences, made solid or with snow bricks, semicircular igloos for the anti-aircraft crews, foundations for the anti-aircraft guns. Everything is virgin clean, white almost blue, and over it all the gentle vault of blue sky. Everything that is not white comes as a shock to the eye. The poppy-red flag of the trail scout can be seen from a kilometre away. Not for nothing it is said here, ‘Snow is the life-line for the soldier. He digs himself into it, drinks it, washes himself in it.’My long sight, which is a nuisance when I am reading or writing, is most useful here. I could see nearly everything, right up to the horizon. There, on the frozen lake road, multi-coloured dots are moving . … there are the lorries. If they are pink, it means mutton carcasses are being transported, if black – coal, if yellow – boxes made of bark with I don’t know what in them, smooth and white, almost indistinguishable from the snow – bags of flour. This is our daily bread, our life-line, sent to Leningrad from the Great Earth. [Landmass in Soviet hands as distinguished from enclaves within German occupation held by the partisans or besieged places.]The labour of the Ladoga lorry drivers is a sacred labour. It is enough to cast an eye on the road. This worn-out, bombed, tormented road which knows no peace, day or night. Its snow is turned to sand. Wrecked machines and spare parts are lying everywhere-in ruts, pot-holes, ditches, in bomb craters, there are wrecked vehicles.And this is the road that the Ladoga drivers cross four times a day under bombing and shell-fire. It is for them that everywhere there are notices printed in scarlet on shields: ‘DRIVER HAVE YOU DONE TWO RUNS TODAY?’ And indeed each driver does his two trips.
 26th february 1942 lake ladoga the ice road that saved leningrad