On Guam the Japanese were once agin well dug in and determined to fight to the death. Despite the overwhelming might of the US Naval forces ranged against they still faced a bloody and brutal assault in order to prevail.Alvin M Josephy had landed with one of the first waves on the 21st, he was still with them on the night of the 25th/26th as that faced up to a suicidal Japanese counter-attack:See See The Long and the Short and the Tall: Marines in Combat on Guam and Iwo Jima (Classics of War)Toward midnight one of the men on watch noticed that the Japs were throwing a lot of grenades. On both sides of him, other Marines were hurling their own grenades back into the night. Many of these burst ﬁve and ten feet above the ground, the fragments showering on the wet dirt.At about three A.M. a riﬂeman named Martinez heard a swishing of grass out ahead of him, like men moving about. Then he noticed the pang of pieces of metal hitting each other and a busy stirring in the darkness that made him uneasy. He peered into the mist but was unable to see anything.Then, as he listened, other things happened. A barrage of hand grenades ﬂew through the darkness and exploded behind him. They kept coming, and he noticed mortar shells beginning to crash more frequently on the ridge.He woke the other two men in his foxhole. They had been curled in their ponchos, and they got to their feet uncertainly. At the same moment an orange signal ﬂare shot up from the Japanese lines. A singsong voice shouted into the night, and an avalanche of screaming forms bounded suddenly into view.With their bayonets gleaming in the light of sudden ﬂares, they charged toward the Marine foxholes, throwing grenades and howling: “Ban-zai-ai!” like a pack of animals.The Marines awoke with a start. Along the ridge, wet, groggy men bolted to their feet and grabbed their weapons. Grenades exploded like a crashing curtain against the onrushing Japs. A man on a telephone yelled for uninterrupted ﬂares, and ﬂickering lights began to hang in the air like giant overhead fires.All along the line the enemy attack was on. Red tracer bullets ﬂashed through the blackness. Japanese orange signal flares and American white illumination shells lit up the night like the Fourth of July, silhouetting the running forms of the enemy. On the right and the left the attack was stopped cold.…Action around two heavy machine guns was typical of what was occurring. A Jap grenade hit one gun, temporarily putting it out of action. The crew members ﬁxed it quickly and started ﬁring again.A second grenade hit the gun’s jacket and exploded, knocking off the cover and putting it completely out of the ﬁght. The same blast wounded one of the men. His three companions moved him to a foxhole ten yards behind the shattered gun.One man jumped in beside him. and the other two ran back to the machine-gun foxholes with their carbines. Heaving grenades like wild men, they managed to stall any Jap frontal charge for the moment.Meanwhile, the other gun was also silenced. Riﬂemen in foxholes near by heard a sudden unearthly screaming from the gun position. By the wavering light of ﬂares, they saw one of the crew members trying to pull a Japanese bayonet out of another Marine’s body.The same instant a wave of Japs appeared from nowhere and swept over both men. Three of the enemy, stopping at the silent machine gun, tried to turn it around to ﬁre at the Marines. In their hysteria, one of them pulled the trigger before the gun was turned, and the bullets sprayed a group of Japs racing across the top of the ridge.Finally the Japs tried to lift the entire gun on its mount and turn the whole thing. A Marine automatic rifleman blasted them with his BAR, and the Japs dropped the gun. Two of them fell over the bodies of the Marine crew. The third pulled out a grenade and, holding it to his head, blew himself up.A moment later another band of Japs appeared. Again, several paused at the gun and tried to swing the heavy weapon around. They had almost succeeded, when from the darkness a lone, drunken Jap raced headlong at them, tripped several feet away over a body, and ﬂew through the air. There was a blinding ﬂash as he literally blew apart. He had been a human bomb, carrying a land mine and a blast charge on his waist.
 26th july 1944 marines fight off japanese banzai charge on guam