Hitler’s annual speech at the Sports Palace in Berlin was the usual rambling affair. He continued to portray Britain as the principal enemy as he sought to disguise his [permalink id=9593 text=”intentions towards Russia”].  However the speech is particularly notable because he concluded with one of his most explicit references to the action he intended to take against the Jews. With the benefit of hindsight the threat  to ‘finish’ ‘Jewry in Europe’ seems very clear. It was very clear to many in the Nazi Party who wanted to ratchet up the level of violence against the Jews. But for many people around the world what he was really proposing was just too appalling to be credible:Read the whole speech at the Jewish Virtual Library.We go into the new year with a fighting force armed as never before in our German history. The number of our divisions on land has been enormously increased. Pay has been increased, the gigantic unique experience of war among the leaders and the file has been put to use. The equipment has been improved-our enemies will see how it has been improved (applause and commotion). In the spring our U-boat war will begin at sea, and they will notice that we have not been sleeping (shouts and cheers). And the Air Force will play its part and the entire armed forces will force the decision by hook or by crook. Our production has increased enormously in all spheres. What others are planning we have achieved. The German people follows its leadership with determination, confident in its armed forces and ready to bear what fate demands. The year 1941 will be, I am convinced, the historical year of a great European New Order. The program could not be anything else than the opening up of the world for all, the breaking down of individual privileges, the breaking of the tyranny of certain peoples, and better still, of their financial autocrats.Finally this year will help to assure the basis for understanding between the peoples, and thereby, for their reconciliation. I do not want to miss pointing out what I pointed out on 3rd of September [1940] in the German Reichstag, that if Jewry were to plunge the world into war, the role of Jewry would be finished in Europe. They may laugh about it today, as they laughed before about my prophecies. The coming months and years will prove that I prophesied rightly in this case too. But we can see already how our racial peoples which are today still hostile to us will one day recognize the greater inner enemy, and that they too will then enter with us into a great common front. The front of Aryan mankind against Jewish-International exploitation and destruction of nations. 30th january 1941 hitlers new world order