The 1st Battalion, Irish Guards had only just arrived in Tunisia, just in time to celebrate St Patrick’s Day in the town of Bone. They arrived at a critical moment, with the Allies attempting to put the final squeeze on the German and Italian forces. They went straight to the front line just as the fighting intensified.On this occasion John Kenneally was just an onlooker:Within two weeks of arriving in North Africa the Battalion had lost over a quarter of its men and it had no clear idea of what had happened to them. The were conflicting accounts from the five survivors.Lieutenant D.G. MADDEN the Intelligence Officer for the Battalion submitted this report of the attack, made in the early hours of 30th March:See TNA WO 361/935John Kenneally was to conclude:See John Kenneally: The Honour and the Shame.Our No 2 Company (103 officers and men) were ordered to do a probing attack on Recce Ridge. This meant advancing across the valley in the dark, climbing the mined slopes, a quick in-and-out battle on the ridge and then a withdrawal in daylight back across the valley. It looked a sticky job. Suicidal, even. We had ‘stood to’ at dusk, and at midnight we watched silently as No 2 Company moved out. The night was clear and we could see the stars but there was little moonlight, We watched and listened intently. Everything was unusually quiet, except for the occasional illuminating flare that went up, but that was quite normal. Just before 5am the silence was shattered by our own artillery behind us opening up. They laid a heavy barrage on the top of Recce Ridge. The noise was ear splitting and it lasted for about fifteen minutes. When the barrage ended we could hear heavy machine-gun fire and the thumping of grenades. Firing became intermittent and the artillery put down smoke, presumably to cover the Company’s retreat back down the slopes. After the smoke we heard light automatic fire and occasional rifle shots, then nothing. It was daylight now. We watched and waited for No 2 Company to reappear, but they never did. Out of 103, five wounded guardsmen were the only ones to return.The attack was carried out on the orders of higher command with the object of checking the despatch of reinforcements to ROMMEL. Although it proved costly to the Battalion, it is hoped it served its purpose in the higher command’s general plan. The Company moved off at 0045 hours and at 0530 hours reported that they were in position below the crest of RECCE RIDGE. Soon after Mortar and rifle fire were observed on the face of the ridge and Major BUCKNILL called for artillery support on the Eastern edge of the ridge. This was quickly forthcoming. At 0600 hours the artillery programme commenced and shortly afterwards the Company crossed the ridge. From then on for the best part of two hours much machine gun fire was heard and large parties of men were seen going up and down the ridge. This could not be understood as the wireless communication had broken down. Meanwhile Lieutenant McINERNEY and two detachments of mortars had gone out on the left to cover the withdrawal. They were joined by Capain ROYLE, an R.A. F.O.O. who had got back, and who reported that he had seen a section of No. 2 Company being taken prisoner. Otherwise he could furnish no information. The mortars covered the withdrawal of 5 wounded men (Sergeant DEAZLEY, Sergeant MEARS, McCAFFERTY, and two gunners) and then were ordered to withdraw. Major GORDON-WATSON had come up to join them. THey came down the track towards No. 3 Company, but found it under heavy shell fire, turned and tried another way. As they came to the railway bridge they noticed, just in time, a wire stretched across the road to which was suspended a mine. Major GORDON-WATSON with complete disregard of his own personal safety leaped out of the leading carrier and undid the wire. The carriers returned safely.…There seems little doubt that the Company fulfilled its task of getting into the gullies on the other side of the crest, this being borne out by Sergeant MEARS, one of the wounded, who returned yesterday. A German C.S.M. who did not enjoy the proceedings and left at the earliest possible moment reported in at No. 1 Company this morning. He described a confused melee at the top of the hill and apparently was under the impression that we had won the day.As ordinary infantry soldiers, by the very nature of things, we were not privy to the ‘Grand Design’. We had to do as ordered and follow the man in front – very much a case of ‘Ours not to reason why, etc’. I suspect our battalion officers were in a similar position, but the powers-that-be threw No 2 Company’s lives away. As was said in the First World War, ‘It was not the Germans who took our lives, it was our own Generals who did for us.’ Later, Recce Ridge was captured by a full battalion of the 78th Division supported by Churchill tanks. No 2 Company was completely replaced by first line reinforcements from the camp in Algiers. These new arrivals were very relieved to find anything left of the 1st Battalion – there had been persistent rumours in the rear echelons that most of the battalion had been wiped out. It was a grim-faced battalion that moved out of ‘Happy Valley’ (a misnomer if ever there was one). 30th march 1943 irish guards suffer heavy losses in hilltop battle