In the lead up to D-Day there had been intense discussions between the Army and Air Force commanders as to whether, and how, the heavy bomber fleets could support the ground operations. The particular problems of supporting an amphibious assault had been given much thought. The devastating destructive power of a heavy bombing raid had huge potential to support the landings – but also the potential danger that they might hit the amphibious assault itself:For the full story see B24 Net.For a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.All crew briefings stressed the idea that special care was to be taken to prevent dropping of bombs on friendly troops who were held in a line 1,000 yards back from the beaches. Special briefing was given all H2X navigators and bombardiers several days before D-Day by a committee of three officers from Headquarters, 8AF. A special instructional booklet had been prepared to further aid them in blind bombing in case visual bombing could not be used.Air crews were briefed at 10 p. m. on June 5, and at 2:40 a.m. on June 6, 33 aircraft took off on the group’s 100th mission, the first of three missions flown that day.In the 392nd’s lead B-24 were Lawrence Gilbert, command pilot; Cliff Edwards, 578th Squadron and group lead pilot, with J.D. Long, his copilot; Leonard Untiedt, navigator; Walter Joachim, bombardier; and Joe Whittaker, 2nd Air Division bombardier was an observer. Other crew members of the lead aircraft were Norm Mellow, Bill Braddock, Milt Medel, Bob Hill and George Phelps.During the 392nd’s assembly, an unknown formation of bombers flew through the 392nd’s lead, high and low squadrons, the lights of the errant formation suddenly appearing out of the darkness, coming from the one o’clock level position and passing through the formation from the front to the rear and then, just as quickly, disappearing into the night. Lt. Col. Gilbert remarked later: “There was a stunned silence in the cockpit after they were gone as we realized that an horrific multi-aircraft mid-air collision had been narrowly avoided.” 5 june 1944 2200 b 24 crews are briefed for d day bombing missions