From the Weekly Resume of the Naval Military and Air Situation up to 12 noon on 5th September 1940:NAVAL SITUATION.
General Review.An agreement has been concluded to transfer 50 destroyers from the United States to Great Britain. British naval forces have been active in both the Eastern and Western Mediterranean. U-Boat activity in the North Western Approaches has been maintained and E-Boats have achieved some success in attacks on shipping off the South-East coast.AIR SITUATION.
General Review.35. Our bombing operations against Germany were on the same scale as in the previous week. The main objectives were aircraft factories, power stations and other industrial concerns engaged in the manufacture of armaments. Targets in the Berlin area were again successfully attacked and several forests in Germany were set on fire by incendiary bombs. Attacks were made on two nights on objectives in Northern Italy.36. The scale of enemy attack on this country by day during the week under review was considerably greater than it was in the previous week, but by night it was slightly smaller. Attacks were chiefly against aerodromes by day and industry by night, though some damage was inflicted on aircraft and other factories in daylight and aircraft production will be affected, though not seriously. Attacks on aerodromes have achieved no important results.Great Britain.
38. About twice as many aircraft were employed by the enemy in daylight attacks as in the previous week. The raids were generally of a mass character by large formations and were repeated two or three times daily. These daylight operations have been mainly directed against aerodromes, especially those in the South-East of England.The attacks were particularly heavy on the 30th and the 31st August and on the 2nd September, the enemy employing between 600 and 800 aircraft on each of these days. On one day only, the 31st August, was any extensive damage done, but the three aerodromes concerned were soon made serviceable again.On the afternoon of the 4th September an attack was made on Vickers-Armstrong aircraft factory at Weybridge, Surrey, which was seriously damaged, and heavy casualties were incurred. The majority of the enemy aircraft which took part in this attack were destroyed.HOME SECURITY.
General Review.61. The main objectives of enemy day attacks appear in most cases to have been the aerodromes of Kent and the Thames Estuary; but the aircraft industry has also suffered. Systematic machine-gunning of civilians is reported from Wareham and also from the Scilly Islands, where earlier reports of severe panic among the inhabitants have since proved to have been exaggerated. 5th september 1940 daylight bombing raids into britain increase