Lieutenant Dick Winters (later to become famous when he portrayed in the series Band of Brothers) assumed command of Easy Company (2nd Battalion, 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment of the 101st Airborne Division) in the early hours of D-Day. The paratroopers had been widely dispersed during the landings and many men had lost equipment during the drop. They spent some time in the early hours gathering together and forming up, although they were still very far from full strength.At about 0830 Winters was asked to lead what became known as the Brécourt Manor Assault. His instructions were very simple “There’s fire along that hedgerow there. Take care of it”. There was no briefing or intelligence other than that. In fact Winters and his group of 12 men were being asked to attack a prepared Field Gun position of four 105mm howitzers defended by about sixty German paratroopers who had taken over the the position when the original German troops had deserted.For the full account see D-Day with the Screaming Eagles. George Kosimaki, who himself fought with the 101st on D-Day, used the account that Winters wrote when out of the field, due to wounds, on 22nd June 1944. Winters, a very modest man, later downplayed his role in the battle, even though he was recommended for the Medal of Honor.For a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.We hadn’t gone far when we came across some dead Jerries and I was still looking for a weapon when I found an M-1 under the seat of a German wagon. So I was happy once again.A little further along, I had a revolver, belt, canteen, gas mask, and lots of ammunition, so I was feeling ready to fight — especially after I bummed some food from one of the boys.E Company now consisted of 2 light machine guns, one bazooka (without ammunition), 1 6Omm mortar, 9 riflemen, and 2 officers. We were running across a lot of dead Boche as we moved down the road for our objective, but very little fire.[Suddenly some heavy stuff opened up on the head of the column as they moved into a small town called Le Grand-Chemin.]The column stopped, we sat down content to rest. In about ten minutes, Lieutenant George Lavenson (Battalion S-4) came walking down the line and said, ‘Winters, they want you and your company up front.’ So off we went.Up front I found Captain Hester, Lt. Nixon, and Kelley in a group talking it over. Seemed like Kelley had taken his company up to a position when he could see the 88’s, but couldn’t do anything about stopping their fire. Captain Hester showed me where a machine gun was and about where an 88mm was situated. That was all I knew.First thing I did was have everybody drop all equipment except ammunition and grenades for that’s all we’d need, if things went good or bad. Then I placed one of my two machine guns in a position where he could give us a little covering fire as we went more or less into position.Next, I divided the group into two units. One went with Lt. Compton, the other with myself. He took one hedge, I another. When we reach the hedge that led up to our position, we stopped. Here I placed another machine gunner facing on the 88 that was pointing straight at us, with instructions not to fire unless he saw a definite target, so he wouldn’t give his position away for he was without cover from the gun.Then we worked up to Lt. Compton’s hedgerow. Here I spotted a ]erry helmet and squeezed off two shots – later found a pool of blood at this position — while the rest of us gave him [Compton] covering fire. I fired occasionally to fill in spots when there was a lull in the covering fire due to putting in new clips.They took too long getting up and we spent more ammunition than we should have, but in return we received no enemy fire. Just as Compton was ready to throw his grenades I started up with the rest of the assault team so that we were all jumping into the position together as the grenades went off.At the same time we were throwing more grenades to the next position, and in return receiving small arms fire and grenades… 6 june 1944 0830 lt dick winters leads easy company into battle