Robert Slaughter was not in the first wave that hit Omaha beach at around 0630, although the conditions he encountered were no different to those who had gone before:See Omaha Beach and Beyond: The Long March of Sergeant Bob SlaughterFor a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.About 150 yards from shore I raised my head despite the warning from someone to “keep your heads down.” I could see the craft to our right were taking a terriﬁc licking from small-arms ﬁre. Tracer bullets were bouncing and skipping gff the ramp and sides as they zeroed in on the boat, which touched down a few minutes before we did. Had we not delayed a few minutes to pick up the survivors from the sunken craft, we might have taken the concentration of ﬁre that boat took. Great plumes of water from enemy artillery and mortars kept sprout- ing close by.We knew then that this was not going to be a walk-in. No one thought that the enemy was going to give us this kind of opposition on the water’s edge. We expected A and B companies to have the beach secured by the time we landed. The reality was, in the sector where we touched down, no one had set foot. This turned boys into men. Some would be very brave men, others would soon be dead men, but all of those who survived would be frightened men. Some wet their britches, others cried unashamedly, and many just had to ﬁnd it within themselves to get the job done. This is where the discipline and training took over.As we approached the beach the ramp was lowered. Mortar and artillery shells exploded on land and in the water. Unseen snipers concealed in the cliffs were shooting down at individuals, causing screams from those being hit. The water was turning red from the blood. The noise from artillery ﬁre, the rapid-ﬁre rattle from nearby MG-42s, and naval gunﬁre was deafening. The smell of cordite was something that would forever become ﬁxed in our minds, always associated with death and destruction.I was stationed on the left side of the craft and about ﬁfth from the front. Norﬂeet was leading on the right side. The Englishman had escaped to the rear [his landing craft was manned by the Royal Navy not the USCG]. The ramp was in the surf and the front of the steel craft was bucking violently up and down.As my turn came to exit, I sat on the edge of the bucking ramp trying to time my leap on the down cycle. I sat there too long, causing a bottleneck and endangering myself as well as the men that followed. The one-inch steel ramp was going up and down in the surf, rising as much as six or seven feet; I was afraid it would slam me in the head.One of the men was hit and died instantly. There were dead men in the water and there were live men as well. The Germans couldn’t tell which was which. All were coming in with the tide. It was extremely hard to shed the heavy equipment, and if one was a weak swimmer, he could drown before inﬂating his life preserver. I had to inﬂate mine to get in, even though I was a good swimmer. I remember helping Private Ernest McCanless, who was not a very strong swimmer, to get closer in, so he wouldn’t drown under all the weight.There were dead men ﬂoating in the water and there were live men acting dead, letting the tide take them in. I was crouched down to chin-deep in the water when I saw mortar shells zeroing in at the water’s edge. Sand began to kick up from small-arms ﬁre from the bluffs.It became apparent that it was past time to get the hell across that beach. I don’t know how long we were in the water before the move was made, but I would guess close to an hour. Initially I tried to take cover behind one of the heavy timbers and then noticed a mine tied to the top, so I made the wise decision not to go for it. Getting across the beach became an obsession. The decision not to try never entered my mind. 6 june 1944 0645 the final run in to omaha beach