Captain Walter E. Marchand was a Battalion Surgeon with the U.S. 4th Infantry Division headed for Utah Beach:TRhe whole of this diary originally appeared at http://battlestory.org/index.php?p=1_115_-D-Day-Doctor-s-Diary -D-Day Doctor’s Diary. It may be possible to access this from the internet archive.For a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.At 0400 the first wave of our Assault Battalion is called to stand-by to load into the boats – there is a great hum of activity throughout the ship.  The Captain speaks – our LCM’s haven’t come yet, but there is still plenty of time.  We wait for 20, 40, 55 minutes.  Then they come out of the dawn alongside – still enough time to make the H hour landing, for H hour has been upped because of the heavy seas.  The LCM3’s are having great difficulty tieing up to the boat – they toss around like corks – but the landing nets are overside and the troops make their way down – but with great difficulty.  Often large hausers, 2 inch thick, would snap like a thread and often the man climbing down would be thrown into the small boats.  It was especially difficult to get the vehicles overboard into the small boats.  “Man overboard” was heard once – a British sailor was knocked overboard but rescued.First wave – Away, then the second, then the third, then it was my turn to get into my boat with 5 of my men and part of the Battalion Command section – it took long, the boat crashed against the ship time and time again, bending the ramp, and tearing loose, snapping the hausers.  Finally we are all in our boat with our equipment, and the men are getting seasick, and they huddle together toward the rear of the boat.  I stay near the front of the boat, getting sprayed continuously and I look about me and see hundreds upon hundreds of boats, from the little LCVP’s, LCM’s, LCT’s and LCI’s, to the huge battleships and cruisers, and smoke is billowing from their deck guns, for this is H-40 min. and the Naval barrage starts then, the fire directed against enemy shore installations.  Our wave has now formed and we are heading toward shore 7 miles away through rough waters, while on the way in our Dive bombers get to work, pouring tons of bombs against the enemy fortresses. 6 june 1944 0455 force u transfers to their assault boats