The attempt to launch the secret DD tanks off Omaha had met with disaster when 27 of them sank in the heavy seas. Off Juno beach the Royal Navy were bringing in the Canadian DD tanks which were supposed to launch directly off the LCTs into the sea and ‘swim’ in. Fortunately as they approached the decision was made to take them all the way in and land them directly on the beaches. But the Canadian tank crews were not impressed:Sergeant Leo Gariepy, age 31, B Squadron, 6th Armored Regiment, Canadian Armored Corps:This account appears in Russell Miller(ed): Nothing Less Than Victory: Oral History of D-DayFor a full illustrated story of D-Day and the Normandy campaign explore hundreds of contemporary images in the iPad App Overlord. The free iBook US Forces on D-Day provides a sample.After a short while the minesweeper leading us in slowed down and began making a semicircle. Signals were exchanged: the minesweepers had completed their task and were wishing us Godspeed on our mission. The ﬂotilla of LCTs began maneuvering for launching our DD tanks. This meant it was necessary for them to head into the wind, showing a broadside to the enemy supposedly alert on the coast.The men were grim, expecting at any moment retaliation from the coast. It seemed incredible that we had not been seen. Our LCT was having great difﬁculty trying to maintain its position for launching. Orders to start tank motors had been given, all gear stowed on board, wirelesses tuned to a predetermined frequency. Silent prayers could be observed on every grim face, the well-oiled mechanism of the gun breeches could be heard being worked, and some of the men were doing innocent little things, watched intensely by the others.Finally the launching ofﬁcer called us together and said that High Command had vetoed launching in such a rough sea. This had the effect of a ﬁrecracker among the troops. They were ﬁghting mad, but no amount of cursing or pleading would make him change his mind.The LCT began maneuvering again to bring us right into the beaches. We were then approximately nine thousand yards out, and the spirit had gone out of everyone. We were discouraged and disheartened to realize that all our training had been in vain and we would now be dropped on the beaches like “gravel crushers” (infantry) at the mercy of the navy. 6th june 1944 0745 heavy seas prevent dd tanks launching