A 2019 study pulls together a large number of sources to provide an overview of The Germans in Normandy. There was a huge disparity between what the frontline German troops were experiencing and what Hitler was being told. The German public was being given another picture altogether – a much rosier perspective:Richard Hargreaves paints a broad canvas, using numerous first hand accounts to provide the varying German perspectives on the battlefield.Friend and foe alike that Wednesday asked himself: Where is the Luftwaffe? But as on the preceding day, the German Air Force found the task facing it overwhelming.At first light on 7 June Oberfeldwebel Herbert Kaiser climbed in his trusty Messerschmitt Me109 and prepared to do battle again. Kaiser was one of two ‘old guards‘ left among the senior non—commissioned officers in III Gruppe, Jagdgeschwader 1. A veteran of around 1,000 sorties, Kaiser had downed forty Soviet aircraft on the Eastern Front, and nine Allied in North Africa, but the air battle over Normandy was something new:The Focke-Wulfs of Schlachtgeschwader 4, the specialist ground-attack squadron which had arrived in Normandy on the afternoon of D-Day, began taking off at 6 a.m. on 7 June to attack the beachhead. Just twenty four Fw19Os were able to attack the landing area. Of the four waves which set off, only one penetrated the Allied fighter cordon to actually make a run at the troop concentrations on the beaches remaining Focke—Wulfs jettisoned their bombs and returned to base, only to be pounced upon by Mustangs.The next day was no better. One of three attacks on the beachheads was broken off early. All the squadron heard from above was criticism and admonishment. Orders were being issued, its diarist fumed, ‘only by people who had no idea of the situation or the strength of the enemy defences’.Other Luftwaffe units were still moving up to their front-line airfields that Wednesday. Hauptmann Hans Groos had already witnessed the destruction of the aircraft of his JG26 on the first day of invasion at Le Mans.Now, he approached the beachheads in trucks as the fighter unit searched for a suitable airfield. To Adolf Hitler in East Prussia, Gerd von Rundstedt was reporting that the battle for the beaches was making good progress. The invader would be defeated, the venerable field marshal assured his Fuhrer:To the ordinary German citizen, the battle on the Channel coast was proceeding according to plan. The radio and newspaper accounts told them it was.The Volkischer Beobachter trumpeted ‘heavy enemy losses‘. Enemy paratroopers had been ‘wiped out’; the Normandy terrain was littered with ‘countless crashed gliders and dead paratroopers‘. The Nazi Party newspaper continued: 7 june 1944 allied air superiority almost complete over beachheads