It was a time of violent emotions in France. Huge joy and relief at being liberated were mixed with recriminations against those who had collaborated. The last remaining Germans were in a fearful position. It was to take along time for the country to come to terms with the effects of the occupation.Bill Bellamy was tank troop commander whose letter from today paints a vivid picture of the situation:See Bill Bellamy: Troop Leader: A Tank Commander’s Story7 September 1944Dear FredDon’t think I am going soft using pink paper, but I think the ex- owner must have used it for writing to his fraulein — he won’t need it now so I am using it up for him. I am very well and in pretty good spirits. We are at present still in France but quite close to the Belgium frontier. Where we go from here I don’t know and I don’t particularly care if we never move. We led the way here across the Seine and the Somme after those day and night drives you read about, and we were ﬁrst into this place which is a mining town.The push here was tiring but very little opposition, but the welcome we received and are still receiving is terriﬁc. You just had to stop for fear of running over people and, just like on ﬁlms, we were showered with ﬂowers, apples, pears, given wine, eggs, bread, in fact I think everything that they can possibly spare.At this moment, I am sitting in a miner’s kitchen writing this letter and with my smattering of French, my little dictionary and plenty of patience on their part I get along OK. Every half hour or so a cup of coffee is produced and then the cognac, carefully hoarded for nearly ﬁve years for just this day.The help given us since the break through by the FFI is really amazing. They are armed with all sorts of weapons, old French arms, captured or stolen German arms, hand grenades, bottles, anything in fact, and their enthusiasm and real hatred of the Germans amazes the unenthusiastic British soldier.In this small place alone, six FFI have been killed in the last few days rounding up stragglers, as they are doing most of this work for us, and the Jerries, especially the SS are dead scared to surrender to them, not without reason I think. Three SS were thrown off the top of one of the slag heaps here just before we arrived and they still have 30 SS and two collaborators down one of the shafts, 400 feet down and they have been there eight days, but what they have suffered seems to me to justify their attitude: seventeen women and children, eyes gouged out and hands cut off publicly for reprisal against the FFI and I myself saw the results of the massacre of a farmer and his family of seven for refusing food. The mentality of these maniacs is beyond my comprehension.Yesterday was another celebration — 35 women became hairless for consorting with the German soldiers, one of them the wife of a French PoW with a little Boche around the house. It seems to me a rotten way to treat women but I suppose it’s a different mental make-up from the French.‘This is the third day we have been here now and there are still crowds around the tanks. It gets a bit monotonous but I suppose this is a great time for all of them, but you just can’t move without a crowd of kids at your heels, screaming ‘Cigarette for papa,’ ‘bully beef,’ ‘biscuit,’ ‘bon bon’ and ‘chocolate’. Papa has cost me about 300 fags from my stock and all my chocolate ration so far, it’s got to the stage where you smoke a pipe in self defence — but it’s still worth it to see people so happy again.All along the roads up here it was the same, cheering people and loads of flowers, and I discovered why the French always prefer wine — their beer is terrible.The roads here are littered with battered Jerry kit, a tribute to the air force; the worst part was to see all the horses lying dead. The amount of horse transport they must have been compelled to use is amazing, showing that Bomber Command attacks on the oil industry has been worth it.Prisoners testify that they have to account for every litre and one told us that they have plenty of fighters in Germany but they have no petrol for them. Most prisoners seem to have reconciled themselves to the fact that they have lost the war, but blame their officers for deserting them, and the FFI stabbing them in the back, but some of the young ones still think they will win, on what other grounds than Goebbels they base their assumption, I don’t know.It was lovely weather until last night, then the weather broke and it is cold and now at 1.30pm it still hasn’t stopped raining and outside is the legendary French mud. All over this area you see signs of the last war, old trenches and names with towns and dates cut in trees which have doubled their size since the letters were cut.
 7 september 1944 free french mop up last german opposition