On  8th September the British newspapers were full of reports of the rapid Allied advance through France and Belgium. A further victory was also apparent.The British had conquered the German V1 rocket attacks and there was widespread reporting of a statement made by War Cabinet member Duncan Sandys who had claimed that “except possibly for the last few shots, the battle of London is over”.He had praised the assistance of United States officials who:A highly concentrated barrage of anti aircraft guns on the south coast had proved to be very effective in knocking the V1 rockets out of the sky. Those that got through the barrage were often intercepted by pursuing aircraft, either Typhoon or the latest Spitfires, which just had the speed to catch them. On 28th August 90 out of 97 V1 rockets fired at London had been brought down by the guns, and only four missiles got through to hit London. Soon the Allied advances on the continent would put them completely out of range.However the Minister had been evasive when questioned about whether there was a “V2” rocket: Allied intelligence knew about the V2 but had little information on how close the Germans were to making them operational.In fact the Germans had been struggling with the problem of the V2 rockets exploding in mid air. On 30th August they had introduced modifications which seemed to have solved the problem. Just before noon on the 8th a German rocket battery in occupied Belgium had pumped eight tons of alcohol and liquid oxygen into their rocket and fired it at Paris. Six people were killed and thirty-six injured. At 6.43pm that day Chiswick, west London was rocked by a massive explosion, closely followed by another boom that was heard across London. The first explosion had been real enough – caused by 760 kilos of Amatol. The explosion that was heard just after it was the supersonic missile breaking the sound barrier as it re-entered the atmosphere. It had been just minutes since the missile had left the Hague in Holland.Three people had been killed in Staveley Road, Chiswick, although casualties were light given the thirty feet wide, eight foot deep crater.The Brentford and Chiswick Air Raid Precautions centre reported Incident 636 of the war:Attempts  by the Press to report the ‘Mystery Explosion’, the site of which had been visited by several unusually senior military figures and politicians, were blocked by the censor. Locally the reason given was ‘a Gas Main explosion’. Over the following weeks Londoners were to become familiar with this phrase.See Christy Campbell: Target London: Under attack from the V-weapons during WWII had thrown themselves into the job of beating the bomb as if New York or Washington had been the victim of the attack…The latest American equipment for use with British heavy guns was ordered earlier in the year when ﬂying bomb attacks began to look imminent. The necessary priority was accorded by the President as a result of a personal request by the Prime Minister. Intelligence, agents, air reconnaissance and photo-interpretation units warned us in the ﬁrst place what Hitler was preparing for us, and since then we have directed our bomber forcesm with remarkable precision onto the weak links and bottlenecks in the enemy’s organisation. The visitation which London has so bravely borne has been painful enough. Had it not been for the vigilance of the intelligence services and the unrelenting efforts of the British and American air forces, her ordeal might have been many times more severe.I think we’ve got enough to deal with if we stick to the V1  we do know quite a lot about it … but in a very few days’ time I feel the press will be walking over these places in France and they will know a great deal more about it than we do now. It would be very dangerous for anyone to make a statement now.Eleven houses demolished, 15 seriously damaged and evacuated. Blast damage to 516 houses. St Thomas rest centre opened to house sixteen. The WVS [Women’s Voluntary Service] incident inquiry point opened to the 10th. 14 families re-housed, three billeted. 8 september 1944 the first ballistic missile attacks v2 rockets