Sergeant Bill Leaney had been captured at Singapore. Along with thousands of others he was now shipped off to Thailand to build the Burma Siam railway. December 1942 found him in Ban Pong PoW camp, which [permalink id=23563 text=”Dr Robert Hardie”] had passed through on the way to Kenburi camp. He described it then as a ‘nauseating sea of mud’ but Bill Leaney’s problem was food or the lack of it:This extract from William Leaney’s diaries appeared in The Faraway War: Personal Diaries Of The Second World War In Asia And The Pacific. The collected papers and diaries of William Leaney are in the Imperial War Museum.William Leaney was to survive the hunger, hard labour and ill treatment in the Japanese labour camps in Thailand but he did not see England again. In September 1944 he was put on a boat to Japan with 2,300 PoWs, travelling on [permalink id=24069 text=”one of the ‘Hell ships’.”] He was on either the Kachidoki Maru or the Rakuyo Maru, which were sunk by US submarines on the 12th September 1944.8th December 1942I sold my gold watch yesterday afternoon. I think Mum and Dad will understand. I can buy a new watch when I get out of here but I want to get out of here that’s the important thing and much longer on their food and we definitely won’t get out of here. Yesterday was a ’Yasumi’ supposedly to celebrate the declaration of war. I had had this tick fever for 2 days and didn’t go sick for I was sweating on the holiday allowing me to recover but the Nips held a big check roll-call at 10 a.m. and I am afraid, for the first time in my army career I fainted and had to be carried off. Of course their food for the last few days has been bad even for this place and I suppose that had something to do with it also. Then at dinner time the Thai people who are allowed to come up and sell stuff in the camp brought up fritters and cakes and toffee and we (’Brum’, Benjy, Wilbur, and I) had to sit and watch some of our people eating it then to go down to dinner and get just salt water and rice. It was too much, so after another roll-call at 3 where I once more had to sit in the shade to avoid ‘passing out’ I took myself down to the river and sold the watch for 35 dollars. I shan’t go into the details of how I tried to get 40 (the Thais who bought it even put it in a bowl of water when I said it was waterproof) but the bastards know we’re desperate and of course they are cashing in.Today since we’ve had the money we’ve been unable to buy damn all except a few cents worth of toffee but please God we’ll be able to get some eggs or some sunfish soon. I feel a lot better today and so hungry I’d like to describe adequately the abject misery I felt at parting with my watch, sat on that river bank haggling with the Thais. I kept thinking of home and I could remember Mum digging it from the sideboard to give me it. Anyway they got a bargain, for it’s been a damn good watch.Another poor chap died last night- a sergeant was found dead in his bed this morning. Only about 28 years of age and he makes the 15th in this camp – it’s astounding when one comes to think of it. We managed to buy some food after all yesterday and we had some fritters and some eggs – very good – as Wilbur said quite the best watch he’d tasted …
 8th december 1942 hunger in a pow labour camp in thailand