In Italy the Allied forces had crashed up against the German Gothic Line and were engaged in an intensive battle, as bloody and intense as the earlier struggle at Cassino.Corporal John Blythe was a  signaller with the New Zealand Division. At this time he was working a little back from the front line, providing communications in the Divisional Area. He was not out of range of shellfire himself but his memoirs, of this period during September 1944, recall a particular episode:See John Blythe: Soldiering on: A Soldier’s War in North Africa and ItalyThe Division was heavily engaged and suffering casualties and the field ambulance unit was the place to see them. They stitched up the bodies of the dead in our grey army blankets and laid them out in rows on stretchers to await burial. Under the tightly stretched blankets their shapes were unmistakable; they were like so many mummies. Down the driveway of the cement works came a gaggle of laughing young teenagers, all girls.I watched them pass, speculating what would be their reaction when they reached the blanketed forms. They stopped, one girl stepped forward and leaned over the nearest body. Then she screamed. They all screamed and, turning, came running back horror-stricken, uttering keening cries from mouths held open. I thought, next time you’ll think twice before you go roaming through the Divisional area.We had become involved in a grinding routine of artillery barrages and infantry attacks; pounding guns and the guttural thumps of the tanks, abrupt detonations of incoming stuff, the whoosh of flamethrowers and blackened German corpses.Under cover of darkness we advanced to occupy a large two-storey building which previously may have been a hospital. We made it one and became an advanced dressing station-cum-operating theatre close up to the battle scene. It was near the town of Forli, Mussolini‘s birthplace, and there was all hell going on around us. The commanding officer and his staff were clearly worried at our proximity to the forward units.A decision was made to lower the largest tarpaulins bearing the red cross they possessed from the top of the roofs on the side facing the enemy in the hope that at daylight the Germans would respect them. This they did and in all that bedlam not a single shot came our immediate way.Our radio van was parked outside the front door. For some time we watched two orderlies digging a deep pit between us and the door. Perhaps it was a rubbish hole? In a way it was. As the attack mounted and the night wore on casualties arrived in jeeps and carriers. Some even walked. From time to time there would be a flash of light, a door banged, and an orderly came out and dropped something into the pit. By daylight it continued; the surgeons were obviously engaged in amputations.A few nights later I was conducted through one of the wards, an experience I never wish to repeat. There were twenty or more men in that ward and all were unconscious. Many of the beds were steeply tilted, some bodies suspended on wires in strange positions and connected to tubes. They were all enclosed in white mosquito nets stretching to the ceiling, seemingly caught in ghastly cobweb.It was weird. I had heard wounded screaming or moaning more than once, but nothing like the scream from this sedated silence. There is a verse in Les Cleveland’s The Iron Hand: New Zealand Soldiers’ Poems from World War Two. It’s from ‘Autumn 1945: Sparamagos: Riccione’:The wounded strung on surgical wires
In wards like winter-bleached landscapes
Are racked on loving engines of repair
While pus drains daintily from deep wounds
And bone-scraping nightmare meticulously
Mangles them with blunt knives
Some die after months
Cursing Life.The orderly showing me round was no ghoul, just interested in his job…‘He won’t last to morning. He’s had it. That one might. This one looks as if he is already gone.‘ Acutely conscious of having all my working parts, I wanted to be out of the place. Almost all were dying, and the greenshaded lighting on the waxen faces already made them look like corpses. 9 september 1944 wars grim reality in the divisional area italy