The Chiefs of Staff weekly Resume of the Naval Military and Air Situation up 12 noon on the 22nd August, as reported to the War Cabinet:From the Naval Situation:German newsreel footage of some of the railway guns also employed, for a French audience:British naval guns were soon installed as a response, the first nicknamed ‘Winnie’, because of Winston Churchill’s personal interest in the project, the second named ‘Pooh’. For a full history, and many pictures, of the British guns see Gatekeepers.From the Military Situation:From the Air Situation:para. 8.
On the 22nd August when the East-bound Channel convoy was approaching the Dover Strait it came under long-range fire from heavy guns situated near Gris Nez. The bombardment continued for nearly 3 hours without success, 108 rounds being fired apparently in four gun salvoes. An enemy battery of four guns and another of three guns were located. Two shells landed in Dover harbour, one narrowly missing a minesweeping trawler. Soon after midday the same convoy was unsuccessfully attacked by 30 aircraft.
para. 20.
The Italian offensive against Egypt is still awaited. In the meantime there has been little activity in the frontier area of Eastern Cirenaica, although a large Italian garrison is still in close proximity. It is probable that action by our aircraft has interfered with preparation of the large dumps that will be required to supply advancing columns. It is also possible that if Italy intends to begin hostilities in Greece an attack on Egypt will be timed to coincide with Greek requests for a fulfilment of our guarantee.para 31.
German air operations were chiefly against aerodromes, though industrial targets and military establishments were also attacked. Operations varied considerably in intensity.The average number of aircraft of all types operating against this country per day was about seven hundred. Of these approximately two hundred were long-range bombers, a few coastal types, and the whole of the remainder short-range dive-bombers and fighters. This allotment of forces, together with the targets attacked, leads to the conclusion that the German Air Force is attempting to destroy our fighter defences, both by wearing them down and by direct attack, to pave the way for large-scale bombing raids by the long-range bomber force.German reconnaissance aircraft were regularly employed throughout the week on weather flights, looking for shipping, reconnoitring targets prior to raids and assessing damage after them. Minelayers were particularly active in the early part of the week. Transport aircraft are still extensively supplementing communications in France and the Low Countries. The German air force is apparently making great efforts to improve night-flying training on all types. german guns shell dover